

[PAGE 1]
Single-ventricle physiology Steven M. Schwartz, MD*, Catherine L. Dent, MD, Ndidi L. Musa, MD, David P. Nelson, MD, PhD Division of Cardiology, Cardiac Intensive Care Unit, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, 3333 Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, OH 45244, USA The term ‘‘single ventricle’’ applies to several congenital cardiac anomalies and their subsequent postoperative anatomy. Single-ventricle physiology presents a challenge to the intensive care physician because patients with these lesions often respond to common interventions such as supplemental oxygen, mechanical ventilation, and vasopressors differently than patients with conventional circulations. Furthermore, single-ventricle patients are commonly encountered in pediatric critical care medicine because they undergo multiple cardiac operations, may be more adversely affected by intercurrent illnesses, or have chronic cardiac problems that may require intensive care. A thorough understanding of the complexities of single-ventricle physiology is therefore imperative for the pediatric intensivist. This article addresses the important physiologic issues that arise in the care of patients with single-ventricle anatomy. Because there are important alterations in anatomy and physiology that are unique to each of the reconstructive stages of single-ventricle palliation, the physiology of the newborn (pre- and postoperative), bidirectional cavopulmonary anastamosis (bidirectional Glenn or hemiFontan), and total cavopulmonary anastamosis (Fontan) circulations are discussed. The newborn Anatomy In congenital heart disease, anatomy dictates physiology. Single-ventricle physiology can result from a number of anatomic lesions that are associated with a variety of physiologic manifestations (Table 1). Although virtually all newborns with single-ventricle physiology have mixing of pulmonary and systemic venous 0749-0704/03/$ – see front matter D 2003 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/S0749-0704(03)00007-1 * Corresponding author. E-mail address: schws0@cchmc.org (S.M. Schwartz). Crit Care Clin 19 (2003) 393–411

[PAGE 2]
return, the relative amounts of each vary substantially depending on the underlying anatomy. The most important anatomic issue that can affect data interpretation and intensive care management is the outflow to and from the systemic ventricle and lungs. The newborn may have either pulmonary or aortic obstruction or bilaterally unobstructed outflow. Additionally, either systemic or pulmonary venous return may also be obstructed in the single-ventricle circulation in the newborn. Systemic outflow obstruction Systemic outflow obstruction occurs in hypoplastic left heart syndrome (HLHS), tricuspid atresia with transposed great arteries, double inlet left ventricle, and other less common anatomic variations. Single-ventricle physiology with systemic outflow obstruction is also applicable to newborns with critical aortic stenosis, severe coarctation of the aorta, or interrupted aortic arch. The important features of this type of anatomy are complete mixing of systemic and pulmonary venous return and ventricular outflow directed primarily to the pulmonary artery. Systemic blood flow (Qs) is provided largely by right-to-left ductal shunting and is dependent on the relative pulmonary and systemic vascular resistance. In general, systemic outflow obstruction is poorly tolerated, and in the face of single-ventricle anatomy is usually accompanied by signs or symptoms of shock. Pulmonary outflow obstruction Single-ventricle physiology with pulmonary outflow obstruction occurs in lesions such as tricuspid atresia, pulmonary atresia, and severe Ebstein’s anomaly of the tricuspid valve, among others. The salient anatomic features are complete mixing of systemic and pulmonary venous return and ventricular outflow predominantly directed out the aorta. Low pulmonary blood flow (Qp) in single-ventricle patients implies an obligate right-to-left shunt, generally at the Table 1 Anatomic diagnoses commonly associated with single-ventricle physiology in the newborna Physiology Anatomy Systemic outflow obstruction Hypoplastic left heart syndrome Critical aortic stenosis Critical coarctation of the aorta Interrupted aortic arch Tricuspid atresia with transposition of the great arteries Double-inlet left ventricle Double-outlet right ventricle (some variations) Pulmonary outflow obstruction Tricuspid atresia with normally related great arteries Pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular septum Tetralogy of Fallot with pulmonary atresia Critical pulmonary stenosis Severe Ebstein’s anomaly of the tricuspid valve Double-outlet right ventricle (some variations) a Not all diagnoses listed are single-ventricle lesions. S.M. Schwartz et al / Crit Care Clin 19 (2003) 393–411 394

[PAGE 3]
atrial level, and results in deoxygenated blood reaching the systemic circulation and the clinical finding of cyanosis. The clinical consequences of low Qp are variable and depend on the severity of the lesion. Mild obstruction may permit an inordinate amount of the total cardiac output to go to the pulmonary circulation, sometimes at the expense of systemic cardiac output. Treatment is therefore directed at limiting, rather than increasing Qp. Infants with this type of anatomy may be only minimally cyanotic and can have signs and symptoms of congestive heart failure. At the other end of the spectrum are those with severe pulmonary outflow obstruction or even atresia. These patients are profoundly cyanotic unless an alternate source of Qp is quickly established. The atrial septum In the setting of a single-ventricle lesion, unobstructed pulmonary or systemic venous return often depends on an unrestrictive interatrial communication. When one of the atrioventricular (AV) valves is severely stenotic or atretic, as occurs in HLHS, tricuspid atresia, or pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular septum, a large atrial septal defect is required for decompression of the atrium with the inadequate AV valve. Obstruction of the systemic venous atrium causes increased central venous pressures, third spacing of fluid, and limited systemic cardiac output. Although a patent foramen ovale allows right-to-left shunting of blood across the atrial septum, it may be inadequate to permit unobstructed flow of all systemic venous return. Obstruction of the pulmonary venous atrium causes elevated pulmonary venous pressure and pulmonary hypertension. This phenomenon can be helpful in the immediate newborn period, because it can limit Qp and enhance systemic flow, thereby increasing systemic oxygen delivery (DO2) even at the expense of arterial oxygen saturation (SaO2). Nevertheless, the atrial septum must be opened at the time of the first palliative operation to avoid the long-term consequences of elevated pulmonary vascular resistance. A severely restrictive or intact atrial septum with pulmonary venous hypertension usually requires emergent creation of an atrial level shunt because of profound cyanosis. These procedures carry a high risk of morbidity and may imply a worse prognosis for further palliative surgery [1,2]. Postoperative anatomy There are three primary surgical options for the newborn with single-ventricle anatomy. The goal of any initial palliative surgery is to establish unobstructed pulmonary and systemic venous return, unobstructed systemic outflow, and limited Qp and pulmonary artery pressure. Typically, this goal is accomplished by a stage I Norwood type procedure, a modified Blalock-Taussig shunt, or a pulmonary artery band. Although variations on each of these operations exist, they represent the spectrum of postoperative anatomy the intensive care physician is likely to encounter. Because each anatomic arrangement establishes similar S.M. Schwartz et al / Crit Care Clin 19 (2003) 393–411 395

[PAGE 4]
physiology, the important differences between them are in the means by which each operation accomplishes its goals. The Norwood operation requires cardiopulmonary bypass, cardioplegia, and a period of deep hypothermic circulatory arrest, although newer techniques can limit circulatory arrest time [3–5]. The heart, kidneys, brain, and other organs including the systemic and pulmonary endothelium undergo a period of ischemia followed by reperfusion often followed by a defined period of myocardial, renal, and perhaps endothelial dysfunction in the postoperative period. A Blalock-Taussig shunt, either alone or as part of a stage I Norwood procedure, often results in low diastolic arterial pressure, which may compromise coronary perfusion. Unlike a Blalock-Taussig shunt, a pulmonary artery band is not associated with diastolic systemic arterial run-off. Some investigators have suggested a pulmonary artery band may increase the risk of subaortic obstruction and ventricular hypertrophy [6], although this assertion has also been disputed [7]. Both shunts and bands carry the risk of unilateral pulmonary artery obstruction, and this possibility should be included in the differential of late cyanosis after either of these procedures. Physiology Ratio of pulmonary blood flow to systemic blood flow Regardless of underlying anatomy, the newborn with single-ventricle physiology has mixing of systemic and pulmonary venous return, and the total cardiac output is partitioned into Qp and Qs based on the amount of anatomic obstruction or vascular resistance to flow in the respective circuits. It is generally assumed that SaO2 reflects the ratio of Qp to Qs (Qp/Qs) in the unoperated, shunted, or banded newborn single-ventricle patient. This assumption is based on manipulation of the Fick principle. The Fick equation for Qs is Qs ¼ VO2=ðCaO2  CmvO2Þ ð1Þ and for Qp is Qp ¼ VO2=ðCpvO2  CpaO2Þ ð2Þ where VO2 = oxygen consumption, CaO2 = arterial oxygen content, CmvO2 = mixed venous oxygen content, CpvO2 = pulmonary venous oxygen content, and CpaO2 = pulmonary artery oxygen content. By substituting the equations for oxygen content into equations 1 and 2, and because arterial and pulmonary artery saturations are identical in this type of single ventricle physiology, one can derive a simplified Fick equation for Qp/Qs Qp=Qs ¼ ðSaO2  SmvO2Þ=ðSpvO2  SaO2Þ ð3Þ where SmvO2 = oxygen saturation of mixed venous blood, SaO2 = oxygen saturation of arterial blood, and SpvO2 = oxygen saturation of pulmonary venous blood. S.M. Schwartz et al / Crit Care Clin 19 (2003) 393–411 396

[PAGE 5]
Equation 3 can be further simplified because the lungs are relatively healthy in most infants with congenital heart disease. The oxygen saturation of pulmonary venous blood can therefore be assumed to be normal at approximately 95% in room air. If one also assumes that the systemic arterial-venous oxygen saturation (A-VO2) difference (SaO2  SmvO2) is normal, at approximately 25%, equation 3 can be simplified to Qp=Qs ¼ 25=ð95  SaO2Þ ð4Þ This simplified version of the Fick equation allows estimation of Qp/Qs based on SaO2. Given the ease with which SaO2 can be obtained in clinical practice, equation 4 has clear advantages. Specifically, it allows the clinician to estimate DO2 simply by looking at SaO2. Thus, one can theoretically assess the effectiveness of any intervention designed to alter Qp/Qs by observing the change in SaO2. This simplified approach to estimating Qp/Qs is based on assumptions regarding SmvO2 and SpvO2. The assumption regarding the systemic A-VO2 difference is accurate only if DO2 is normal. In shock, which often occurs in neonates with ductal dependent Qs, or in the face of myocardial dysfunction following surgery, SmvO2 will be low, and therefore SaO2  SmvO2 will be substantially higher than 25%. When the decrease in SmvO2 is offset by an increase in the amount of well-saturated blood returning from the lungs (increased Qp/Qs) SaO2 will remain unchanged. Clinical data suggest that this occurrence may be common [8–11]. Many centers have begun to monitor SmvO2 routinely following Norwood palliation for HLHS using a sample from the superior vena cava (SVC) as representative of mixed-venous blood (in single ventricle anatomy, there is no site of true systemic mixed-venous blood). Fig. 1 shows simultaneous SaO2, SmvO2, and mean arterial blood pressure (MAP) in a subject in the first 3 to 4 hours following Norwood palliation. The SaO2 remains relatively constant, but SmvO2 plummets starting at about 17:00 and is accompanied by a slight increase in MAP. The only plausible explanation for this phenomenon is that Qp/Qs increases dramatically, and the decrease in SmvO2 is offset by the larger amount of well-saturated blood returning to the heart from the lungs, the result of the increase in Qp/Qs. In this situation, estimation of Qp/Qs from SaO2 alone would lead the clinician to the erroneous conclusion that the Qp/Qs is well balanced when Qs is actually critically low. Several studies suggest the average systemic A-VO2 difference is about 25% to 30% [8,10] as predicted by the assumption inherent in equation 4, but the range of values is quite broad, limiting the applicability of equation 4 to any particular patient. Although SpvO2 is likely to be normal in the absence of clinical or radiographic evidence of pulmonary parenchymal disease, there are conditions under which this assumption is also false. Taeed and colleagues [10] placed catheters in the left lower pulmonary vein at the time of the Norwood operation in infants with HLHS and found unexpected pulmonary venous desaturation occurred commonly, particularly with a fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2) below 0.3 S.M. Schwartz et al / Crit Care Clin 19 (2003) 393–411 397

[PAGE 6]
(Fig. 2). Failure to account for decreased SpvO2 results in a falsely low calculation of Qp/Qs using equation 4. As shown in Fig. 3, small errors in estimation of SpvO2 can result in gross inaccuracy in calculated Qp/Qs [12]. The important clinical implication of this principle is that maneuvers that decrease SpvO2 rather than Qp/Qs result in lower SaO2 and reduced DO2 because there is no increase in Qs. The importance of accurately estimating Qp/Qs can be seen when one considers the relationship between Qp/Qs, DO2, and total cardiac output (Fig. 4) [13]. Using mathematical modeling and keeping SpvO2 constant at 96%, one can generate a series of curves showing DO2 as a function of Qp/Qs. Because the total cardiac output pumped by the single ventricle is Qp + Qs, an increase in Qp is accompanied by a decrease in Qs, and vice versa, unless the total cardiac output also increases. Fig. 4 shows that the maximum DO2, represented by the dashed line, occurs between a Qp/Qs of approximately 0.5 and 1 and depends on the total cardiac output. The slope of each isobar for a given cardiac output is steepest on either side of the maximum DO2, suggesting that small changes in Qp/Qs can be associated with large changes in DO2. Fig. 4 also suggests DO2 can be improved to a far greater degree by increasing total cardiac output than by altering Qp/Qs. One limitation to this type of model for DO2 is the use of SaO2 and Qs as interchangeable components of DO2. Although newborns tolerate cyanosis well, the oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve dictates that once SaO2 becomes critically low, further decreases can no longer be compensated for by increases in Qs [14]. Fig. 1. Arterial oxygen saturation (SaO2), mean arterial blood pressure (MAP), and mixed venous oxygen saturation (SmvO2) over time in a patient following Norwood palliation. The SmvO2 falls precipitously, whereas MAP and SaO2 do not change significantly. This phenomenon can be explained by a rise in systemic vascular resistance associated with an increase in pulmonary blood flow and a decrease in systemic blood flow. (From Tweddell JS, Hoffman GM, Fedderly RT, et al. Phenoxybenzamine improves systemic oxygen delivery after the Norwood procedure. Ann Thorac Surg 1999;67:161–7; discussion 167–8; with permission.) S.M. Schwartz et al / Crit Care Clin 19 (2003) 393–411 398

[PAGE 7]
Nevertheless, when cardiac output is maximized, optimization of Qp/Qs is still important for improvement of marginal DO2. Cardiac output Low total cardiac output (Qp + Qs) in single-ventricle physiology causes both low Qs and low SaO2 and thus recognition is of critical importance to allow rapid diagnosis and treatment. In the absence of SmvO2 monitoring, low SaO2 with clinical signs of low cardiac output such as anuria, poor capillary refill, high ventricular filling pressure, or metabolic acidosis out of proportion to the degree of cyanosis suggests poor cardiac function. Single-ventricle physiology places the newborn at an increased risk of ventricular dysfunction [15–17]. The single ventricle is volume loaded compared with an anatomically normal heart in which the left ventricle needs only to supply Qs. Low Qs, particularly with low diastolic blood pressure (as seen in the newborn with a large patent ductus arteriosus) or a high end-diastolic ventricular pressure (as occurs in a volumeloaded heart or after cardiopulmonary bypass) can cause coronary perfusion pressure to become critically low. This development can compromise systolic ventricular function and further raise end-diastolic pressure and lower systemic arterial pressure. If not rapidly corrected, this situation can result in profound hemodynamic decompensation. Manipulation of delivered oxygen The goal of management in single-ventricle physiology is to ensure adequate DO2, not to maximize SaO2. Optimization of DO2 requires maintenance of Fig. 2. Pulmonary venous oxyhemoglobin saturation (SpvO2) plotted as a function of fractional inspired oxygen (FiO2) demonstrates that pulmonary venous desaturation occurs frequently following the Norwood operation. Pulmonary venous oxyhemoglobin saturation lower than 95% (points below the dashed line) most often occurs at FiO2 below 0.21 but can also occur at an FiO2 as high as 0.40 (From Taeed R, Schwartz SM, Pearl JM, et al. Unrecognized pulmonary venous desaturation early after Norwood palliation confounds Qp:Qs assessment and compromises oxygen delivery. Circulation 2001;103:2699–704; with permission.) S.M. Schwartz et al / Crit Care Clin 19 (2003) 393–411 399

[PAGE 8]
cardiac inotropy while balancing Qp and Qs and maintaining adequate blood pressure and SaO2. Clinically, this task is challenging because of the inherent interrelationships between these hemodynamic variables. Furthermore, blood pressure and SaO2 may not reflect moment-to-moment alterations in underlying physiology and may remain constant over a wide range of Qp/Qs [10,11]. Although management of newborn single-ventricle physiology has traditionally focused on manipulation of Qp/Qs by manipulation of pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR), newer data suggest management of total cardiac output and systemic vascular resistance (SVR) may be more effective [11]. In all instances, maintenance of oxygen-carrying capacity by keeping hemoglobin in the range of 13 to 15 mg/dL can have a positive influence on DO2. Increased hemoglobin concentration increases SmvO2 and SaO2 and decreases Qp/Qs in single-ventricle physiology [18,19]. Most commonly, differential manipulation of PVR and SVR is through the use of oxygen, CO2, and acid-base status (Table 2) [20,21]. Subatmospheric oxygen (FiO2 0.17–0.19) or induction of respiratory acidosis can effectively raise PVR, decrease SVR, and thus decrease Qp/Qs in infants with unrestricted Qp. Subatmospheric oxygen should be used with caution because it may be associated with pulmonary venous desaturation and thus have a less beneficial effect on DO2, particularly in the postoperative patient [10]. Furthermore, use of inhaled CO2 in newborns with HLHS has been associated with increased cerebral or systemic DO2 compared with subatmospheric oxygen [22,23] and after the stage I Fig. 3. The percent error in pulmonary/systemic blood flow ratio (Qp/Qs) as a function of pulmonary venous oxyhemoglobin saturation (SpvO2). Arterial oxyhemoglobin saturation (SaO2) is assumed to be 77%, and mixed venous oxyhemoglobin saturation is assumed to be 45%. The relationship is plotted for both a 5% and 10% error in SpvO2. (From Barnea O, Austin EH, Richman B, et al. Balancing the circulation: theoretic optimization of pulmonary/systemic flow ratio in hypoplastic left heart syndrome. J Am Coll Cardiol 1994;24:1376–81; with permission.) S.M. Schwartz et al / Crit Care Clin 19 (2003) 393–411 400

[PAGE 9]
Norwood procedure [24]. It is less clear that manipulation of PVR is useful in altering Qp/Qs in infants with low PVR and anatomically restricted pulmonary blood flow. One study has demonstrated no significant changes in Qp/Qs with subatmospheric oxygen following Norwood palliation [10]. It is likely that Qp becomes limited by the size of the systemic-to-pulmonary artery shunt or pulmonary artery band and further decreases in downstream resistance are of minimal consequence. Table 2 Effects of respiratory maneuvers on pulmonary and systemic vascular resistance Treatment PVR SVR Qp/Qs Increase FiO2 Decrease Increase Increase Increase CO2 Increase Decrease Decrease Increase pH Decrease Increase Increase PEEP Increase No effect Decrease Abbreviations: FiO2, fraction of inspired oxygen; PEEP, positive end-expiratory pressure; PVR, pulmonary vascular resistance; SVR, systemic vascular resistance. Fig. 4. Systemic oxygen availability (mLO2/min) as a function of pulmonary/systemic blood flow ratio (Qp/Qs)at different levels of cardiac output. Pulmonary venous oxyhemoglobin saturation (SpvO2) is assumed to be 96%, and oxygen consumption (VO2) is assumed to be 18 mLO2/min. (From Barnea O, Austin EH, Richman B, et al. Balancing the circulation: theoretic optimization of pulmonary/systemic flow ratio in hypoplastic left heart syndrome. J Am Coll Cardiol 1994;24:1376–81; with permission.) S.M. Schwartz et al / Crit Care Clin 19 (2003) 393–411 401

[PAGE 10]
Pulmonary vascular resistance can also be increased independently of SVR by positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) [21]. When lung compliance is normal, PEEP increases PVR by compressing the interalveolar pulmonary arterioles. To accomplish this compression, the level of PEEP must result in an end-expiratory lung volume greater than functional residual capacity (FRC) because the nadir of PVR occurs at FRC rather than at zero PEEP. The initial application of PEEP above zero applies radial traction forces to the pulmonary vasculature and aids vascular recruitment. Further increases in PEEP above FRC compress the vessels. Increased PEEP may also prevent pulmonary venous desaturation by optimizing lung gas exchange and therefore decrease Qp/Qs while simultaneously maximizing SpvO2 [10]. Another approach to differential regulation of PVR, SVR, and Qp/Qs is pharmacologic manipulation of SVR. Although intravenous vasodilators tend to have similar effects on the pulmonary and systemic vasculature, in the setting of poor systemic perfusion and low PVR, they may have a relatively greater effect on the systemic vasculature. Specifically, nitroprusside, phenoxybenzamine, inamrinone, and milrinone have been used as systemic afterload-reducing agents and to block the a-adrenergic receptor–mediated vasoconstriction that occurs with drugs such as epinephrine. Phenoxybenzamine lowers SVR, decreases Qp/ Qs and improves DO2 after the Norwood operation, even though it is associated with a decrease in systemic blood pressure [11]. b-Adrenergic stimulation of the myocardium in conjunction with vasodilation can further increase total cardiac output (Qp + Qs) without associated vasoconstriction. Other vasodilating agents can potentially be used to accomplish the same goal, although they involve different receptor mechanisms and cellular pathways. Systemic vasodilation may be particularly valuable after operations that require deep hypothermic circulatory arrest such as the Norwood operation. Following conventional cardiopulmonary bypass, during which the lungs are exposed to a period of ischemia and subsequent reperfusion, the pulmonary endothelium may be significantly impaired in its ability to produce nitric oxide [25]. Although the possibility has not been systematically evaluated, it is plausible that there is systemic endothelial dysfunction following circulatory arrest. An inappropriate increase in SVR in single-ventricle physiology is capable of increasing Qp at the expense of Qs while maintaining blood pressure and SaO2 and thus masking potential warning signs of low Qs. The utility of manipulating SVR has not been studied in newborns with unrestricted Qp. Inotropic support that increases Qs may also increase SaO2 simply by increasing SmvO2. The use of particular inotropic agents may also be associated with a change in Qp/Qs in addition to increases in total cardiac output. Riordan et al [26] studied the effects of epinephrine, dobutamine, and dopamine in an animal model of single-ventricle physiology. They found that dobutamine (5 and 15 mg/kg/min) increased Qp/Qs, epinephrine (0.05 and 0.1 mg/kg/min) decreased Qp/Qs, and dopamine (5 and 15 mg/kg/min) had a minimal effect on Qp/Qs. The use of low-dose epinephrine (0.05 mg/kg/min) was associated with the greatest increase in PVR/SVR ratio, largely because of a decrease in SVR. This increase S.M. Schwartz et al / Crit Care Clin 19 (2003) 393–411 402

[PAGE 11]
probably reflects the predominance of vascular b-receptor stimulation at this dose compared with a-adrenergic activation at a higher dose and illustrates the importance of using vasodilating drugs as an accompaniment to inotropic agents with prominent vasoconstrictor properties. The importance of maximizing inotropic function can be seen in Fig. 4. The DO2 is increased dramatically by increasing total cardiac output and is optimized by adjusting Qp/Qs; thus, the combination of inotropic support and decreasing SVR is potentially the optimal strategy to maximize DO2. Not all single-ventricle patients demonstrate pulmonary overcirculation. Elevated PVR can easily persist in the newborn with single-ventricle physiology and can cause severe cyanosis. When Qp is very low (PaO2 < 30 mm Hg), it can effectively increase pulmonary dead space and impair minute ventilation. The occurrence of respiratory acidosis in this setting is of grave concern, because this condition will further increase PVR, limiting the ability to hyperventilate or alkalinize the patient. Treatment of high PVR in the single-ventricle patient is much the same as in any other population. Alveolar recruitment strategies of ventilation are appropriate when there is atelectasis or pulmonary disease, but otherwise airway pressures should be kept to a minimum. High-frequency jet ventilation may be effective in inducing hyperventilation at low mean airway pressure [27], a desirable combination in pulmonary hypertension. Use of supplemental inspired oxygen, hyperventilation, and alkalosis may all be effective. Inhaled nitric oxide and infusion of prostaglandin E have also been used in these patients to lower PVR selectively [28]. Raising systemic blood pressure by vasoconstriction may increase Qp and will usually increase SaO2 but does so at the expense of some systemic perfusion. Bidirectional cavopulmonary anastomosis Anatomy The second stage of single-ventricle palliation is the creation of a bidirectional cavopulmonary anastomosis in which the SVC is connected directly to the pulmonary artery and other sources of Qp are either eliminated or severely restricted. Anatomic variations include the bidirectional Glenn and the hemiFontan anastomoses. These procedures differ in that the hemi-Fontan anastomosis includes the attachment of the proximal stump of the SVC to the underside of the pulmonary artery, but this connection is then patched to avoid flow of deoxygenated blood into the right atrium from the pulmonary artery. The bidirectional cavopulmonary anastomosis has been remarkable for the relatively low level of associated morbidity and mortality. Numerous reviews suggest an overall mortality rate of 3% to 5% [29–31]. Physiology Three significant aspects separate the physiology of the bidirectional cavopulmonary anastomosis from that of a normal circulation or newborn singleS.M. Schwartz et al / Crit Care Clin 19 (2003) 393–411 403

[PAGE 12]
ventricle physiology. First, the driving force for Qp is SVC pressure. Second, Qp must pass through two separate and highly regulated vascular beds: the cerebral vasculature and the pulmonary vasculature. Finally, compared with newborn single-ventricle physiology, the bidirectional cavopulmonary anastomosis removes the left-to-right shunt and thus the volume load from the single ventricle. The clinical physiology of the bidirectional cavopulmonary anastomosis therefore centers on issues regarding central venous/pulmonary artery pressure, pulmonary and cerebral vascular resistance, and alterations in ventricular loading and geometry. Because Qp is supplied by upper body systemic venous return, one consequence of conversion to a bidirectional cavopulmonary anastomosis is an acute rise in SVC pressure. Selection of patients with low PVR as candidates for the bidirectional cavopulmonary anastomosis minimizes the risk of clinical complications arising from elevated SVC pressure [32], but SVC syndrome can occur nonetheless. Failure to maintain low SVC pressure following the bidirectional cavopulmonary anastomosis can also lead to problems maintaining an adequate SaO2. Small veno-venous collateral vessels (such as a persistent left SVC or vein of Marshall) may enlarge in size following a bidirectional cavopulmonary anastomosis and allow a route for desaturated blood in the SVC to bypass the lungs and thus contribute to arterial desaturation [33]. When the anastomosis is performed as part of a hemi-Fontan procedure rather than a bidirectional Glenn procedure, a right-to-left shunt may occur if there is a persistent communication between the SVC and right atrium. To minimize SVC pressure, it is desirable to minimize use of positive pressure, including PEEP, following surgery [34–37]. Setting the ventilator to maintain the PEEP at zero, however, may result in atelectasis and an increase in PVR. Favorable hemodynamics are most likely maintained by using ventilator settings that allow the end-expiratory lung volume to approximate FRC, because PVR is lowest at FRC. In the patient with healthy lungs, minimal mean airway pressure and early extubation are often beneficial, because negative-pressure ventilation is associated with increased Qp in this type of circulation. When lung disease such as pneumonia or acute respiratory distress syndrome occurs in the patient with a cavopulmonary anastomosis, higher airway pressures may actually promote Qp and minimize pulmonary artery pressure if the higher airway pressure helps maintain FRC. Use of aprotinin and modified ultrafiltration have also been associated with a decreased transpulmonary pressure gradient, less pleural drainage, and improved SaO2 [38,39]. Another unique aspect of the physiology of the bidirectional cavopulmonary anastomosis is that Qp is largely dependent on the resistance of two highly but differentially regulated vascular beds. The cerebral and pulmonary vasculatures have opposite responses to changes in carbon dioxide, acid-base status, and oxygen. This difference can make treatment of elevated PVR or low SaO2 particularly challenging. Hyperventilation and alkalosis, for example, may have limited utility in this setting. Although they are effective pulmonary vasoS.M. Schwartz et al / Crit Care Clin 19 (2003) 393–411 404

[PAGE 13]
dilators, hyperventilation and alkalosis cause cerebral vasoconstriction [40,41]. Because Qp is dependent on venous return through the SVC (largely made up of cerebral blood flow), maneuvers that limit cerebral blood flow may decrease Qp and exacerbate hypoxemia. Hyperventilation following bidirectional cavopulmonary anastomosis does, in fact, impair cerebral blood flow and decrease SaO2 [42]. Other frequently used techniques for decreasing PVR, such as deep sedation or anesthesia, may also reduce cerebral blood flow and therefore fail to increase Qp even if they successfully reduce PVR. Inhaled nitric oxide, which acts selectively on the pulmonary vasculature, has been reported to be effective in reducing the transpulmonary pressure gradient for patients after the bidirectional cavopulmonary anastomosis and may therefore be the best treatment for high PVR and low SaO2 [43]. When the degree of cyanosis is not prohibitive, expectant management with good hemodynamic support and maintenance of hemoglobin will often suffice. Arterial oxygen saturation tends to improve slowly in the first few days following surgery and again at the time of extubation as long as there are no intervening airway or pulmonary issues. The real hemodynamic advantage of the bidirectional cavopulmonary anastomosis compared with shunted or banded single-ventricle physiology is in the reduction of the volume load on the ventricle. This reduction occurs because the right-to-left shunt is eliminated and all Qp is effective pulmonary flow. The ventricle now only pumps Qs, not Qp + Qs [44]. Some of the Qs (the portion distributed to the upper body) passes through the lungs before reaching the ventricle again, and thus all blood reaching the lungs is deoxygenated. The advantageous consequences of this volume reduction go beyond simply lowering the amount of blood the ventricle needs to pump to maintain adequate systemic cardiac output. An acute increase in wall thickness and decrease in cavity dimension has been associated with improved tricuspid valve function [45]. Preload and afterload are both decreased, although there is not a measurable increase in ventricular contractile state [46]. Coronary blood flow decreases, probably in response to the lower metabolic demand of the myocardium, but coronary flow changes from predominantly systolic to both systolic and diastolic [47]. When a significant left-to-right shunt persists following bidirectional cavopulmonary anastomosis because of additional sources of Qp or aortopulmonary collateral blood vessels, persistent pleural effusions, high central venous pressures, and low cardiac output may result [48,49]. It is also important to recognize that the changes in ventricular geometry that occur with volume reduction place infants with certain types of anatomy at risk for systemic outflow obstruction. Specifically, when systemic outflow is dependent on flow through a ventricular septal defect or bulboventricular foramen, acute decreases in ventricular dimension may precipitate effective subaortic stenosis. The appearance of an ejection murmur in a patient with susceptible anatomy following bidirectional cavopulmonary anastomosis should prompt a complete assessment for this phenomenon. S.M. Schwartz et al / Crit Care Clin 19 (2003) 393–411 405

[PAGE 14]
Total cavopulmonary anastomosis Anatomy The Fontan operation has several commonly used anatomic variants, all designed to achieve optimal fluid dynamics and minimize the risk of long-term complications. Although one may still encounter older individuals with direct right atrial-to-pulmonary artery connections, the most common current approaches to the Fontan operation are the creation of either an intracardiac lateral tunnel or extracardiac conduit. The lateral tunnel involves placement of a semicircular tube, usually Gore-Tex (WL Gore & Associates, Flagstaff, AZ), along the lateral wall of the right atrium from the inferior vena cava to the SVC. Patients with a prior bidirectional Glenn anastomosis then need to have the proximal portion of the SVC reconnected to the pulmonary artery, whereas those who have had a prior hemi-Fontan anastomosis need only to have the patch between the pulmonary artery and right atrium taken down. The extracardiac conduit uses a complete circular tube of Gore-tex or pericardium to connect the inferior vena cava to the pulmonary artery. The conduit is placed along the outer surface of the right atrium and thus creates a connection incapable of dilating over time, unlike the classic Fontan procedure, or even potentially the lateral tunnel. Either variation on the Fontan procedure can be fenestrated by leaving a hole of known size in the baffle. In the case of the extracardiac Fontan procedure, fenestration requires connection of the conduit to the atrial wall. The different approaches to the Fontan connection may have implications for postoperative physiology, although no consensus on which technique is preferable has yet been reached. The arguments in favor of the lateral tunnel are that it is less thrombogenic, can be done in patients at a younger age, and retains the possibility for growth without the likelihood of severe dilation. Those who favor the extracardiac approach argue that it preserves kinetic energy better, that it can be performed without cardioplegia (thereby reducing the incidence of postoperative myocardial dysfunction [50,51]), and that it is less arrhythmogenic [52] because there is no atrial suture line. Some laboratory work supports the contention that fluid dynamics are better with the extracardiac conduit, but real effects on patient outcome other than incidence of arrhythmia [52] have not been identified [53]. In the absence of a conclusive study, the differences between Fontan techniques remain largely theoretical. Physiology Fontan physiology is a hybrid of bidirectional cavopulmonary anastomosis and normal cardiovascular physiology. As with a bidirectional cavopulmonary anastomosis, Qp is dependent on systemic venous pressure, and all Qp is effective. If the Fontan baffle is fenestrated, there may still be a right-to-left shunt causing some mild systemic arterial desaturation, but the systemic and pulmonary circulation are largely separated, as with a normal heart. Important issues for the intensive care physician arise when there is elevated pulmonary S.M. Schwartz et al / Crit Care Clin 19 (2003) 393–411 406

[PAGE 15]
artery pressure. This elevation can occur either because the PVR is high (or there is mechanical pulmonary artery obstruction) or when myocardial dysfunction raises pulmonary venous atrial pressure. Numerous studies demonstrate that elevated pulmonary artery pressure ( > 10–15 mm Hg) is associated with poor outcome in Fontan patients [54–56], largely because it is difficult to maintain central venous pressure in this range without large third-space losses of fluid. As these fluid losses progress, patients often develop pleural effusions, ascites, and peripheral edema. It then becomes necessary to increase ventilator pressures to maintain adequate FRC and tidal volume in the face of a full abdomen, heavy chest wall, and smaller effective pleural cavities. Increased airway pressure, particularly in the absence of parenchymal lung disease, effectively raises PVR and thus necessitates even higher venous pressures to maintain cardiac output. Furthermore, as central venous and intra-abdominal pressures rise, renal perfusion pressure decreases, especially in the face of low cardiac output and borderline hypotension, as is often the case in this scenario. In general, Fontan fenestration can lower the risk of some of these complications by providing a source of Qs that is not dependent on passing through the pulmonary circulation [57]. Fenestration can also decrease pulmonary artery pressure enough to reduce third-space losses of fluid [57–59]. A randomized trial of a fenestrated versus nonfenestrated Fontan connection has shown that fenestration decreases the duration of pleural effusions and is associated with a shorter hospital stay; however, the effect on acute postoperative hemodynamics was less clear [60]. When an individual with Fontan physiology is in a low cardiac output state, it is essential to determine and treat the underlying cause. Obstruction to Qp should be considered as the cause of low output when left atrial pressure is low and central venous pressure is high. If central venous pressure is not monitored, large third-space fluid losses with a low or normal left atrial pressure should raise the suspicion of this diagnosis. Even in the presence of a fenestrated Fontan, the capability of the fenestration to preserve cardiac output in the face of anatomic or physiologic obstruction to pulmonary blood flow is significantly limited compared with the situation after the bidirectional cavopulmonary anastomosis. Therefore, limited Qp can result in low cardiac output and, when a fenestration is present, in significant cyanosis. Cyanosis can also result from intrapulmonary arteriovenous malformations or ventilation-perfusion mismatch related to low cardiac output [61,62]. If high PVR is responsible for the elevation of central venous pressure, institution of the standard therapies of supplemental oxygen, hyperventilation, and alkalosis is indicated. As in the patient with bidirectional cavopulmonary anastomosis, the use of high positive pressures to achieve these ends may be counterproductive. Negative pressure ventilation can augment stroke volume and cardiac output, and high-frequency jet ventilation may lower PaCO2 at low mean airway pressures [27,63,64]. Intravenous vasodilators such as prostacyclin or prostaglandin E should be used with caution because of the risk of systemic vasodilation with limited cardiac output. Inhaled nitric oxide has been reported to be effective in lowering the transpulmonary pressure gradient [65,66]. S.M. Schwartz et al / Crit Care Clin 19 (2003) 393–411 407

[PAGE 16]
Low cardiac output with high left atrial and central venous pressures indicates myocardial dysfunction in the patient with Fontan physiology. Myocardial dysfunction can occur from ischemia-reperfusion injury if aortic cross-clamping and cardioplegia are used to create the Fontan baffle. It may also be related to poor preoperative myocardial function. Several studies demonstrate better outcome for the Fontan operation in patients under 4 years of age or when a bidirectional cavopulmonary anastomosis has been performed as the second stage in univentricular heart palliation [67,68], suggesting long-standing ventricular volume overload is detrimental to myocardial function. The only effective long-term therapy for low cardiac output with ventricular dysfunction following a Fontan operation is to improve cardiac output and reduce left atrial pressure. The use of inotropic agents that do not increase ventricular afterload, such as phosphodiesterase inhibitors, dobutamine, and low-dose epinephrine ( 0.05 mg/kg/min) may be helpful. If systemic blood pressure will tolerate it, aggressive afterload reduction with vasodilating agents may also lower left atrial pressure significantly. If there is good reason to believe the insult to ventricular function is reversible, mechanical circulatory support can also be effective therapy. Because persistent aortopulmonary collateral vessels can be associated with hemodynamics similar to those of ventricular dysfunction, aggressive assessment and embolization of these vessels may be useful in this situation [69,70]. Summary The patient with single-ventricle physiology presents a significant challenge to the intensive care team at all stages of management. An integrated approach that applies a working knowledge of cardiac anatomy, cardiopulmonary physiology, and the basic principles of intensive care is essential to guide management for each individual patient. This management requires cooperative and constructive involvement of surgeons, cardiologists, and intensivists, as well as a nursing and respiratory care team experienced in the management of single-ventricle patients. The outcome of each stage of palliation for single-ventricle lesions should continue to improve as new ideas are developed and as older ideas are subjected to rigorous scientific analyses. References [1] Atz AM, Feinstein JA, Jonas RA, et al. Preoperative management of pulmonary venous hypertension in hypoplastic left heart syndrome with restrictive atrial septal defect. Am J Cardiol 1999;83:1224–8. [2] Rychik J, Rome JJ, Collins MH, et al. The hypoplastic left heart syndrome with intact atrial septum: atrial morphology, pulmonary vascular histopathology and outcome. J Am Coll Cardiol 1999;34:554–60. [3] Imoto Y, Kado H, Shiokawa Y, et al. Norwood procedure without circulatory arrest. Ann Thorac Surg 1999;68:559–61. S.M. Schwartz et al / Crit Care Clin 19 (2003) 393–411 408

[PAGE 17]
[4] Pearl JM, Nelson DP, Schwartz SM, et al. First-stage palliation for hypoplastic left heart syndrome in the twenty-first century. Ann Thorac Surg 2002;73:331–9; discussion 339–40. [5] Pigula FA, Siewers RD, Nemoto EM. Regional perfusion of the brain during neonatal aortic arch reconstruction. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1999;117:1023–4. [6] Freedom RM, Sondheimer H, Sische R, et al. Development of ‘‘subaortic stenosis’’ after pulmonary arterial banding for common ventricle. Am J Cardiol 1977;39:78–83. [7] Webber SA, LeBlanc JG, Keeton BR, et al. Pulmonary artery banding is not contraindicated in double inlet left ventricle with transposition and aortic arch obstruction. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 1995;9:515–20. [8] Hoffman GM, Ghanayem NS, Kampine JM, et al. Venous saturation and the anaerobic threshold in neonates after the Norwood procedure for hypoplastic left heart syndrome. Ann Thorac Surg 2000;70:1515–20; discussion 1521. [9] Riordan CJ, Locher Jr. JP, Santamore WP, et al. Monitoring systemic venous oxygen saturations in the hypoplastic left heart syndrome. Ann Thorac Surg 1997;63:835–7. [10] Taeed R, Schwartz SM, Pearl JM, et al. Unrecognized pulmonary venous desaturation early after Norwood palliation confounds Qp:Qs assessment and compromises oxygen delivery. Circulation 2001;103:2699–704. [11] Tweddell JS, Hoffman GM, Fedderly RT, et al. Phenoxybenzamine improves systemic oxygen delivery after the Norwood procedure. Ann Thorac Surg 1999;67:161–7; discussion 167–8. [12] Barnea O, Santamore WP, Rossi A, et al. Estimation of oxygen delivery in newborns with a univentricular circulation. Circulation 1998;98:1407–13. [13] Barnea O, Austin EH, Richman B, et al. Balancing the circulation: theoretic optimization of pulmonary/systemic flow ratio in hypoplastic left heart syndrome. J Am Coll Cardiol 1994;24: 1376–81. [14] Francis DP, Willson K, Thorne SA, et al. Oxygenation in patients with a functionally univentricular circulation and complete mixing of blood: are saturation and flow interchangeable? Circulation 1999;100:2198–203. [15] Donnelly JP, Raffel DM, Shulkin BL, et al. Resting coronary flow and coronary flow reserve in human infants after repair or palliation of congenital heart defects as measured by positron emission tomography. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1998;115:103–10. [16] Schwartz SM, Gordon D, Mosca RS, et al. Collagen content in normal, pressure, and pressurevolume overloaded developing human hearts. Am J Cardiol 1996;77:734–8. [17] Williams RV, Ritter S, Tani LY, et al. Quantitative assessment of ventricular function in children with single ventricles using the Doppler myocardial performance index. Am J Cardiol 2000;86: 1106–10. [18] Beekman RH, Tuuri DT. Acute hemodynamic effects of increasing hemoglobin concentration in children with a right to left ventricular shunt and relative anemia. J Am Coll Cardiol 1985;5: 357–62. [19] Lister G, Hellenbrand WE, Kleinman CS, et al. Physiologic effects of increasing hemoglobin concentration in left-to-right shunting in infants with ventricular septal defects. N Engl J Med 1982;306:502–6. [20] Conte S, Hansen PB, Jensen T, et al. Early experience with the Norwood procedure. Cardiovasc Surg 1997;5:315–9. [21] Riordan CJ, Randsbeck F, Storey JH, et al. Effects of oxygen, positive end-expiratory pressure, and carbon dioxide on oxygen delivery in an animal model of the univentricular heart. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1996;112:644–54. [22] Ramamoorthy C, Tabbutt S, Kurth CD, et al. Effects of inspired hypoxic and hypercapnic gas mixtures on cerebral oxygen saturation in neonates with univentricular heart defects. Anesthesiology 2002;96:283–8. [23] Tabbutt S, Ramamoorthy C, Montenegro LM, et al. Impact of inspired gas mixtures on preoperative infants with hypoplastic left heart syndrome during controlled ventilation. Circulation 2001; 104:I159–64. S.M. Schwartz et al / Crit Care Clin 19 (2003) 393–411 409

[PAGE 18]
[24] Bradley SM, Simsic JM, Atz AM. Hemodynamic effects of inspired carbon dioxide after the Norwood procedure. Ann Thorac Surg 2001;72:2088–93; discussion 2093–4. [25] Wessel DL, Adatia I, Giglia TM, et al. Use of inhaled nitric oxide and acetylcholine in the evaluation of pulmonary hypertension and endothelial function after cardiopulmonary bypass. Circulation 1993;88:2128–38. [26] Riordan CJ, Randsbaek F, Storey JH, et al. Inotropes in the hypoplastic left heart syndrome: effects in an animal model. Ann Thorac Surg 1996;62:83–90. [27] Meliones JN, Bove EL, Dekeon MK, et al. High-frequency jet ventilation improves cardiac function after the Fontan procedure. Circulation 1991;84:III364–8. [28] Ishino K, Stumper O, De Giovanni JJ, et al. The modified Norwood procedure for hypoplastic left heart syndrome: early to intermediate results of 120 patients with particular reference to aortic arch repair. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1999;117:920–30. [29] Forbess JM, Cook N, Serraf A, et al. An institutional experience with second- and third-stage palliative procedures for hypoplastic left heart syndrome: the impact of the bidirectional cavopulmonary shunt. J Am Coll Cardiol 1997;29:665–70. [30] Lamberti JJ, Mainwaring RD, Spicer RL, et al. Factors influencing perioperative morbidity during palliation of the univentricular heart. Ann Thorac Surg 1995;60:S550–3. [31] Reddy VM, McElhinney DB, Moore P, et al. Outcomes after bidirectional cavopulmonary shunt in infants less than 6 months old. J Am Coll Cardiol 1997;29:1365–70. [32] Gross GJ, Jonas RA, Castaneda AR, et al. Maturational and hemodynamic factors predictive of increased cyanosis after bidirectional cavopulmonary anastomosis. Am J Cardiol 1994;74:705–9. [33] Filippini LH, Ovaert C, Nykanen DG, et al. Reopening of persistent left superior caval vein after bidirectional cavopulmonary connections. Heart 1998;79:509–12. [34] Alvarado O, Sreeram N, McKay R, et al. Cavopulmonary connection in repair of atrioventricular septal defect with small right ventricle. Ann Thorac Surg 1993;55:729–36. [35] Kim YH, Walker PG, Fontaine AA, et al. Hemodynamics of the Fontan connection: an in-vitro study. J Biomech Eng 1995;117:423–8. [36] Redington AN, Penny D, Shinebourne EA. Pulmonary blood flow after total cavopulmonary shunt. Br Heart J 1991;65:213–7. [37] Sievers HH, Gerdes A, Kunze J, et al. Superior hydrodynamics of a modified cavopulmonary connection for the Norwood operation. Ann Thorac Surg 1998;65:1741–5. [38] Koutlas TC, Gaynor JW, Nicolson SC, et al. Modified ultrafiltration reduces postoperative morbidity after cavopulmonary connection. Ann Thorac Surg 1997;64:37–42; discussion 43. [39] Tweddell JS, Berger S, Frommelt PC, et al. Aprotinin improves outcome of single-ventricle palliation. Ann Thorac Surg 1996;62:1329–35; discussion 1335–6. [40] Kawaguchi M, Ohsumi H, Ohnishi Y, et al. Cerebral vascular reactivity to carbon dioxide before and after cardiopulmonary bypass in children with congenital heart disease. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1993;106:823–7. [41] Madden JA. The effect of carbon dioxide on cerebral arteries. Pharmacol Ther 1993;59:229–50. [42] Bradley SM, Simsic JM, Mulvihill DM. Hyperventilation impairs oxygenation after bidirectional superior cavopulmonary connection. Circulation 1998;98:II372–6; discussion II376–7. [43] Gamillscheg A, Zobel G, Urlesberger B, et al. Inhaled nitric oxide in patients with critical pulmonary perfusion after Fontan-type procedures and bidirectional Glenn anastomosis. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1997;113:435–42. [44] Santamore WP, Barnea O, Riordan CJ, et al. Theoretical optimization of pulmonary-to-systemic flow ratio after a bidirectional cavopulmonary anastomosis. Am J Physiol 1998;274:H694–700. [45] Rychik J, Jacobs ML, Norwood Jr. WI. Acute changes in left ventricular geometry after volume reduction operation. Ann Thorac Surg 1995;60:1267–73; discussion 1274. [46] Donofrio MT, Jacobs ML, Spray TL, et al. Acute changes in preload, afterload, and systolic function after superior cavopulmonary connection. Ann Thorac Surg 1998;65:503–8. [47] Fogel MA, Rychik J, Vetter J, et al. Effect of volume unloading surgery on coronary flow dynamics in patients with aortic atresia. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1997;113:718–26; discussion 726–7. S.M. Schwartz et al / Crit Care Clin 19 (2003) 393–411 410

[PAGE 19]
[48] Frommelt MA, Frommelt PC, Berger S, et al. Does an additional source of pulmonary blood flow alter outcome after a bidirectional cavopulmonary shunt? Circulation 1995;92:II240–4. [49] Mainwaring RD, Lamberti JJ, Uzark K, et al. Bidirectional Glenn. Is accessory pulmonary blood flow good or bad? Circulation 1995;92:II294–7. [50] McElhinney DB, Petrossian E, Reddy VM, et al. Extracardiac conduit Fontan procedure without cardiopulmonary bypass. Ann Thorac Surg 1998;66:1826–8. [51] Uemura H, Yagihara T, Yamashita K, et al. Establishment of total cavopulmonary connection without use of cardiopulmonary bypass. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 1998;13:504–7; discussion 508. [52] Azakie A, McCrindle BW, Van Arsdell G, et al. Extracardiac conduit versus lateral tunnel cavopulmonary connections at a single institution: impact on outcomes. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2001;122:1219–28. [53] Lardo AC, Webber SA, Friehs I, et al. Fluid dynamic comparison of intra-atrial and extracardiac total cavopulmonary connections. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1999;117:697–704. [54] Cetta F, Feldt RH, O’Leary PW, et al. Improved early morbidity and mortality after Fontan operation: the Mayo Clinic experience, 1987 to 1992. J Am Coll Cardiol 1996;28:480–6. [55] Gentles TL, Mayer Jr. JE, Gauvreau K, et al. Fontan operation in five hundred consecutive patients: factors influencing early and late outcome. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1997;114:376–91. [56] Kaulitz R, Luhmer I, Bergmann F, et al. Sequelae after modified Fontan operation: postoperative haemodynamic data and organ function. Heart 1997;78:154–9. [57] Bridges ND, Lock JE, Castaneda AR. Baffle fenestration with subsequent transcatheter closure. Modification of the Fontan operation for patients at increased risk. Circulation 1990;82:1681–9. [58] Airan B, Sharma R, Choudhary SK, et al. Univentricular repair: is routine fenestration justified? Ann Thorac Surg 2000;69:1900–6. [59] Bridges ND, Mayer Jr. JE, Lock JE, et al. Effect of baffle fenestration on outcome of the modified Fontan operation. Circulation 1992;86:1762–9. [60] Lemler MS, Scott WA, Leonard SR, et al. Fenestration improves clinical outcome of the Fontan procedure: a prospective, randomized study. Circulation 2002;105:207–12. [61] Buheitel G, Hofbeck M, Tenbrink U, et al. Possible sources of right-to-left shunting in patients following a total cavopulmonary connection. Cardiol Young 1998;8:358–63. [62] Premsekar R, Monro JL, Salmon AP. Diagnosis, management, and pathophysiology of postFontan hypoxaemia secondary to Glenn shunt related pulmonary arteriovenous malformation. Heart 1999;82:528–30. [63] Shekerdemian LS, Bush A, Shore DF, et al. Cardiopulmonary interactions after Fontan operations: augmentation of cardiac output using negative pressure ventilation. Circulation 1997;96:3934–42. [64] Shekerdemian LS, Shore DF, Lincoln C, et al. Negative-pressure ventilation improves cardiac output after right heart surgery. Circulation 1996;94:II49–55. [65] Goldman AP, Delius RE, Deanfield JE, et al. Pharmacological control of pulmonary blood flow with inhaled nitric oxide after the fenestrated Fontan operation. Circulation 1996;94:II44–8. [66] Yahagi N, Kumon K, Tanigami H, et al. Cardiac surgery and inhaled nitric oxide: indication and follow-up (2–4 years). Artif Organs 1998;22:886–91. [67] Masuda M, Kado H, Shiokawa Y, et al. Clinical results of the staged Fontan procedure in highrisk patients. Ann Thorac Surg 1998;65:1721–5. [68] Uemura H, Yagihara T, Kawashima Y, et al. What factors affect ventricular performance after a Fontan-type operation? J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1995;110:405–15. [69] Kanter KR, Vincent RN, Raviele AA. Importance of acquired systemic-to-pulmonary collaterals in the Fontan operation. Ann Thorac Surg 1999;68:969–74; discussion 974–5. [70] Spicer RL, Uzark KC, Moore JW, et al. Aortopulmonary collateral vessels and prolonged pleural effusions after modified Fontan procedures. Am Heart J 1996;131:1164–8. S.M. Schwartz et al / Crit Care Clin 19 (2003) 393–411 411
